 ### README.md

This repository contains the code for a blog post layout for Jekyll. The layout is designed to be used with the Jekyll static site generator.

#### Prerequisites

To use this layout, you will need to have Jekyll installed. You can install Jekyll by following the instructions on the Jekyll website.

#### Installation

To install this layout, clone the repository to your computer. Then, add the following line to your `_config.yml` file:

```yaml
layout: default
```

This will tell Jekyll to use this layout for all of your blog posts.

#### Usage

To use this layout, create a new blog post file in your `_posts` directory. The file should have a `.md` extension. The front matter of the blog post file should include the following information:

* `title`: The title of the blog post.
* `date`: The date of the blog post.
* `author`: The author of the blog post.
* `meta`: Any additional information about the blog post.
* `tags`: A list of tags for the blog post.
* `categories`: A list of categories for the blog post.

The body of the blog post file should contain the content of the blog post.

#### Example

The following is an example of a blog post file:

```yaml
---
layout: default
title: My First Blog Post
date: 2023-03-08
author: John Doe
meta: This is my first blog post.
tags: jekyll, blogging
categories: tech
---

This is the content of my first blog post.
```

#### Output

When you build your Jekyll site, the layout will generate the following HTML code:

```html
<div class="post">

  <header class="post-header">
    <h1 class="post-title">My First Blog Post</h1>
    <p class="post-meta">March 8, 2023 • John Doe • This is my first blog post.</p>
    <p class="post-tags">
      <a href="/2023/"><i class="fa-solid fa-calendar fa-sm"></i> 2023</a>
      &nbsp; &middot; &nbsp;
      <a href="/blog/tag/jekyll/"><i class="fa-solid fa-hashtag

Generated by [BlackboxAI](https://www.blackbox.ai)