---
layout: post
title: "Exploratory Data Analysis"
date: 2023-07-22 13:33:00 +1000
categories: statistics
---
## Elements of Structured Data
Data comes from many sources: sensor measurements, events, text, images, and
videos,.. Much of this data is unstructured. In fact, a mahor challenge of data science is to harness this **torrent** of raw data into actionable information.

- Continuous: 
Data that can take on any value in an interval.
Synonyms
interval, float, numeric
- Discrete: 
Data that can take on only integer values, such as counts.
Synonyms
integer, count
- Categorical: 
Data that can take on only a specific set of values representing a set of possible categories.
Synonyms
enums, enumerated, factors, nominal, polychotomous
- Binary: 
A special case of categorical data with just two categories of values (0/1, true/false).
Synonyms
dichotomous, logical, indicator, boolean
- Ordinal: 
Categorical data that has an explicit ordering.

There are two basic types of structured data: numeric and categorical. Numeric
data comes in two forms: continuous, such as wind speed or time duration, and
discrete, such as the count of the occurrence of an event. Categorical data takes
only a fixed set of values, such as a type of TV screen (plasma, LCD, LED, etc.)
or a state name (Alabama, Alaska, etc.). Binary data is an important special case
of categorical data that takes on only one of two values, such as 0/1, yes/no, or
true/false. Another useful type of categorical data is ordinal data in which the
categories are ordered; an example of this is a numerical rating (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5).

## Reactangular Data

The typical frame of reference for an analysis in data science is a rectangular
data object, like a spreadsheet or database table.

- Data frame:
Rectangular data (like a spreadsheet) is the basic data structure for statistical and machine
learning models.
- Feature
A column in the table is commonly referred to as a feature.
Synonyms:
attribute, input, predictor, variable
- Outcome:
Many data science projects involve predicting an outcome — often a yes/no outcome (in Table 1-
1, it is “auction was competitive or not”). The features are sometimes used to predict the outcome
in an experiment or study.
Synonyms:
dependent variable, response, target, output
- Records:
A row in the table is commonly referred to as a record.
Synonyms:
case, example, instance, observation, pattern, sample


Rectangular data is essentially a two-dimensional matrix with rows indicating
records (cases) and columns indicating features (variables).

### Data Frames and Indexes
Traditional database tables have one or more columns designated as an index.
This can vastly improve the efficiency of certain SQLqueries. In Python, with the
pandas library, the basic rectangular data structure is a DataFrame object. By
default, an automatic integer index is created for a DataFrame based on the order
of the rows. In pandas, it is also possible to set multilevel/hierarchical indexes to
improve the efficiency of certain operations.


### Nonrectangular Data Structures
- Time series data records successive measurements of the same variable. It is the
raw material for statistical forecasting methods.

- Spatial data structures, which are used in mapping and location analytics, are
more complex and varied than rectangular data structures. 

- Graph (or network) data structures are used to represent physical, social, and
abstract relationships.

## Estimates of Location

Variables with measured or count data might have thousands of distinct values. A
basic step in exploring your data is getting a “typical value” for each feature
(variable): an estimate of where most of the data is located (i.e., its central
tendency).
- Mean: 
The sum of all values divided by the number of values.

- Weighted mean: 
The sum of all values times a weight divided by the sum of the weights.
Synonyms
weighted average
- Median:
The value such that one-half of the data lies above and below.
Synonyms
50th percentile
- Weighted median: 
The value such that one-half of the sum of the weights lies above and below the sorted data.
- Trimmed mean:
The average of all values after dropping a fixed number of extreme values.
Synonyms
truncated mean
- Robust:
Not sensitive to extreme values.
Synonyms
resistant
- Outlier:
A data value that is very different from most of the data.

At first glance, summarizing data might seem fairly trivial: just take the mean of
the data (see “Mean”). In fact, while the mean is easy to compute and expedient to
use, it may not always be the best measure for a central value. For this reason,
statisticians have developed and promoted several alternative estimates to the
mean.


## Estimates of Variability

Location is just one dimension in summarizing a feature. A second dimension,
variability, also referred to as dispersion, measures whether the data values are
tightly clustered or spread out. At the heart of statistics lies variability: measuring
it, reducing it, distinguishing random from real variability, identifying the various
sources of real variability, and making decisions in the presence of it.

- Deviations:
The difference between the observed values and the estimate of location.
Synonyms
errors, residuals
- Variance:
The sum of squared deviations from the mean divided by n – 1 where n is the number of data
values.
Synonyms
mean-squared-error
- Standard deviation:
The square root of the variance.
Synonyms
l2-norm, Euclidean norm
- Mean absolute deviation:
The mean of the absolute value of the deviations from the mean.
Synonyms
l1-norm, Manhattan norm
- Median absolute deviation from the median:
The median of the absolute value of the deviations from the median.
- Range:
The difference between the largest and the smallest value in a data set.
- Percentile:
The value such that P percent of the values take on this value or less and (100–P) percent take on
this value or more.
Synonyms
quantile


Just as there are different ways to measure location (mean, median, etc.) there are
also different ways to measure variability.

## Exploring the Data Distribution
- **Boxplot**:
A plot introduced by Tukey as a quick way to visualize the distribution of data.
Synonyms
Box and whiskers plot
- Frequency table:
A tally of the count of numeric data values that fall into a set of intervals (bins).
- Histogram:
A plot of the frequency table with the bins on the x-axis and the count (or proportion) on the y-axis.
- Density plot:
A smoothed version of the histogram, often based on a kernal density estimate.

## Exploring Binary and Categorical Data
For categorical data, simple proportions or percentages tell the story of the data.
- Mode:
The most commonly occurring category or value in a data set.
- Expected value:
When the categories can be associated with a numeric value, this gives an average value based on
a category’s probability of occurrence.
- Bar charts:
The **frequency or proportion for each category** plotted as bars.
- Pie charts:
The frequency or proportion for each category plotted as **wedges in a pie**.


Getting a summary of a binary variable or a categorical variable with a few
categories is a fairly easy matter: we just figure out the proportion of 1s, or of the
important categories

## Correlation
Exploratory data analysis in many modeling projects (whether in data science or
in research) involves examining correlation among predictors, and between
predictors and a target variable.

- Correlation coefficient:
A metric that measures the extent to which numeric variables are associated with one another
(ranges from –1 to +1).
- Correlation matrix:
A table where the variables are shown on both rows and columns, and the cell values are the
correlations between the variables.
- Scatterplot:
A plot in which the x-axis is the value of one variable, and the y-axis the value of another.

## Exploring Two or More Variables
Familiar estimators like mean and variance look at variables one at a time
(univariate analysis). Correlation analysis (see “Correlation”) is an important
method that compares two variables (bivariate analysis). In this section we look
at additional estimates and plots, and at more than two variables (multivariate
analysis).

- Contingency tables:
A tally of counts between two or more categorical variables.
- Hexagonal binning:
A plot of two numeric variables with the records binned into hexagons.
- Contour plots:
A plot showing the density of two numeric variables like a topographical map.
- Violin plots:
Similar to a boxplot but showing the density estimate.
